# Evolution-of-Egyptian-Hieroglyphs-and-Sentiment-Analysis

## Introduction 

Ever since the discovery of the Rosetta Stone, a decree written in three different scripts, the way hieroglyphs were understood has completely changed. What was once seen as purely unreadable art ended up being recognised as a system of communication that represented phonemes used in Ancient Egypt. The term for the hieroglyphic writing system literally meant “sacred carvings” in Greek (Remler, 2010, p. xi). This discovery suggested that hieroglyphs had their own tone, structure, and grammatical system, but it also provides us with insights into the rituals that were practiced and the lives people led. In this sense, hieroglyphs not only represent the surrounding environment but also offer psychological glimpses into the minds and emotions of individuals who lived thousands of years ago (Ray, 1999, p. iv).

In this research, we focus particularly on the psychological and emotional aspects of the hieroglyphic system by using a popular NLP (Natural Language Processing) technique called sentiment analysis. In today’s highly online world, sentiment analysis plays a crucial role in driving businesses based on customer feedback and reactions to increase overall profit. It is the ability to categorise the emotional tone of characters into various sentiments (like Positive, Negative, and Neutral) to understand the emotional reactions of people based on certain actions taken or done. Sentiment analysis is so powerful that it even drives national and international decisions, simply by analysing how people react and adjusting accordingly. It is safe to say that this technique plays a crucial role in shaping systems of our everyday life to favour us.

Recently, there has been a rise in the trend of using these modern techniques of NLP and data mining, like sentiment analysis, on ancient texts. This not only helps us understand the emotional tone intended to be expressed but also interpret these texts from various languages more accurately without “dumbing them down,” while retaining the complexity of the emotions conveyed when translating or interpreting them. An example of sentiment analysis on ancient texts is poetry in Ancient China. Words in Ancient Chinese are composed of characters called hanzi, which, when tokenized, are discrete in nature. Yet despite their discrete form, the morphemes interwove to create complex imagery and personification that expressed emotions through symbolic meaning (Liu et al., 2024). Similarly, in Ancient Egypt, each hieroglyph, apart from being a form of art, also represented the expression of complex emotions through the discrete nature of these symbols interwoven to form whole sentences, paragraphs, stories, documentation, and even decrees.

In this research, performing sentiment analysis on major texts from the Old Kingdom to the Late Period can give us an idea of how the use of hieroglyphs changed over time and why. With sentiment analysis, we may be able to interpret why the glyphs evolved based on their surroundings and how the purpose of documentation shifted across periods. It can give us insight into what people prioritised, how external situations affected their psychology, and how this could have created the necessity to adapt the hieroglyphic system from one Kingdom to another for various purposes. This research tries to answer three main questions: first, is it possible to detect positive, neutral, and negative emotional tones in transliterations of ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs using simple machine learning models? Second, how does the emotional tone of hieroglyphic texts change over time across the three major kingdoms? And third, are there clear patterns of emotional expression linked to the purpose or type of text, such as religious writing compared to more personal or casual writing?


